Human pose estimation is a booming field and looking at its practical use we are aiming to build AI Pose Estimation & Virtual Gym Tracker by the usage of techniques like controlling gestures, quantifying physical exercise, making detections, determining joints, calculations of angles and implementation of curls. Libraries like OpenCV, Mediapipe, CV2, Numpy and datasets like coco dataset provide us with ML solutions which give the desired result. Wherein MediaPipe provides compact, ready-to-use, fast machine learning solutions for live stream media. To make detections first the mediapipe is set up, image is recolored to RGB ,detections are made and colored back to BGR and detections are rendered. Further to extract the joint coordinates we extract the landmarks (x,y,z,visibility) and the joints that are visible from 32 joints are determined. For the calculation of joint angles we used trigonometry and media pipe functions and the angles are mapped between the joints or say three joint coordinates and visualized and finally implementation of the counter, the reps are calculated. 

Inactivity is one of the main causes of obesity which has affected many people worldwide. Studies show that fitness is an important goal for a healthy lifestyle and is been used as a measurement for health-related quality of life. A fitness trainer can motivate and teach users to do exercise daily and stay fit and healthy. However, to use a fitness trainer might involve a huge cost and sometimes is not suitable for a certain setting. Exercises are very beneficial for personal health but they can also be ineffective and truly dangerous if performed in an incorrect method by the user. There are lot of mistakes made during a workout when user workout alone without supervision like wrong form which could result fatal for user as they can pull a hamstring or even fall due to it. In our project, we introduce AI Trainer, an application that detects the user’s exercise pose and provides personalized, detailed recommendations on how the user can improve their form. Pose Trainer uses the state of the art in pose estimation module known as “BlazePose” tool from “MediaPipe” to detect a user’s pose, then evaluates the pose of an exercise to provide useful feedback. We record a dataset of over 1000 keypoints coordinate of parts of body in correct and incorrect form, based on personal training guidelines, we build a machine learning algorithm for evaluation. AI Trainer works on six common exercises and supports any Windows or Linux computer with a GPU and a webcam. 

The project focuses on creating an AI to help you exercise, by determining the quality and quantity of repetitions which is done by using pose estimation. This project is intended to make exercise more easy and more fun. We are going to see an overview of this project, the algorithms used, its advantages, disadvantages, its efficiency as compared to other existing technologies, applications and possible future work. 

We started this project during pandemic and when all the gyms were shut down and we were in lockdown. At that time, we understood how important is fitness and how such situations can let us to work out in our homes. Sometimes people cannot afford gym membership and are sometimes shy to work out in gym and use weights. On the other hand, sometimes people can afford gym and trainers but because of tight schedule and inconsistency they are not able to remove time for their body and fitness. Thus, we aim to build an AI-based trainer that would help everyone to exercise more efficiently in their own homes in their own comfort.
